Support one-time authorization code for form-based authentication mechanism (#46974)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authentication-mechanisms.adoc

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http_quarkus.http.auth.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[two-factor-auth]]
==== Two-factor authentication

> The form-based authentication mechanism supports two-factor authentication (2FA), with the second-factor being a one-time authorization code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The form-based authentication mechanism supports two-factor authentication (2FA) with a one-time authorization code second-factor option.
```

.Enable two-factor authentication
[source,properties]
----

> quarkus.http.auth.form.otac.enabled=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quarkus.http.auth.form.authorization-code.enabled=true
```
`otac` is a little bit cryptic

Author: done

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http_quarkus.http.auth.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[two-factor-auth]]
==== Two-factor authentication

> The form-based authentication mechanism supports two-factor authentication (2FA) with a one-time authentication token second-factor option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The form-based authentication mechanism supports two-factor authentication (2FA) with a one-time authentication token as a second-factor option.
```

> .Enable two-factor authentication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To enable 2FA, set the following properties:
+
```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.auth.form.authentication-token.enabled=true

> quarkus.http.auth.form.authentication-token.request-redirect-path=/authentication-token-form <1>

Reviewer: This path can be made a default value, `quarkus.http.auth.form.authentication-token.enabled=true` should be enough for such a case. Also propose to shorten the property to `authentication-token.redirect-path`

----
<1> Once the one-time authentication token has been generated, redirect to a page with an authentication token form.

> When user submit a username and password to the `/j_security_check` POST location, they will get relocated to the `/authentication-token-form` page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When users submit a username and password to the `/j_security_check` POST location, they are relocated to the `/authentication-token-form` page.
```

> The `/authentication-token-form` page should allow users to submit the one-time authentication token sent to them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `/authentication-token-form` page allows them to submit the one-time authentication token.
```

> .Example form for authentication with a one-time authentication token

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.An example of an HTML form that submits a one-time authentication token
```

[source,html]
----
<form action="/j_security_check" method="post"> <1>
    <label>Authentication token</label>
    <input type="password" placeholder="Authentication token" name="j_token" required>
    <button type="submit">Login</button>
</form>
----
<1> Send the one-time authentication token to the POST location.

Once Quarkus has generated the one-time authentication token, you need to deliver the token to a user by declaring a CDI bean that implements the `io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.token.OneTimeAuthenticationTokenSender` interface.

> .Example one-time authentication token sender

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.An example of a CDI bean that sends the one-time authentication token by email
```

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.security;

import io.quarkus.mailer.reactive.ReactiveMailer;
import io.quarkus.security.credential.PasswordCredential;
import io.quarkus.security.identity.SecurityIdentity;
import io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.token.OneTimeAuthenticationTokenSender;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;
import jakarta.inject.ApplicationScoped;

@ApplicationScoped
public final class AuthorizationCodeMailer implements OneTimeAuthorizationCodeSender {

    @Inject
    ReactiveMailer reactiveMailer;

    @Override
    public Uni<Void> send(SecurityIdentity securityIdentity, PasswordCredential tokenCredential) {
        // send the one-time authentication token to the user represented by the security identity
        String authenticationToken = new String(tokenCredential.getPassword());
        var mail = Mail.withText("to@acme.org", "Your authentication token", authenticationToken).setFrom("from@acme.org");
        return reactiveMailer.send(mail); <1>
    }

}
----
<1> Use the Quarkus Mailer extension to send the email with the authentication token.

> See the xref:mailer-reference.adoc[Quarkus Mailer Reference documentation] for more information about the mailer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information about the mailer, see the xref:mailer-reference.adoc[Quarkus Mailer reference documentation].
```
